CODEALPHA CYBER SECURITY INTERNSHIP

TASK 1 – BASIC NETWORK SNIFFER

PROJECT STEPS

1. Project Objective

The objective of this project is to develop a basic network sniffer using Python and Scapy to capture and analyse network packets.

2. Python Installation

First, I installed Python on my system and verified the installation using the command:

python --version

3. Scapy Installation

I installed the Scapy library using:

pip install scapy

Scapy is a Python library used for capturing and analysing network packets.

4. Creating the Python Program

I created a Python file named:

sniffer.py

5. Writing the Code

I wrote a Python program using Scapy to capture network packets.

The program captures 10 packets and displays:

* Source IP address
* Destination IP address
* Protocol
* Payload, when available

6. Running the Program

I opened Command Prompt and ran the program using:

python sniffer.py

The program started capturing network packets.

7. Generating Network Traffic

To generate network traffic, I opened websites in the browser and used network activity so that packets could be captured by the sniffer.

8. Analysing the Output

The program displayed information about the captured packets.

Example:

Source IP      : 192.168.x.x
Destination IP : xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx
Protocol       : TCP

The Source IP represents the device sending the packet.

The Destination IP represents the device receiving the packet.

The Protocol identifies the type of network communication, such as TCP, UDP or ICMP.

9. Payload

The program also checks whether a packet contains a Raw layer.

If a payload is available, the program displays it.

Payload represents the data carried inside a network packet.

10. Testing

I tested the program by running it and generating network traffic. The program successfully captured packets and displayed their information.

11. GitHub Upload

After completing and testing the project, I created a GitHub repository named:

CodeAlpha_Basic_Network_Sniffer

I uploaded the following files:

* sniffer.py
* sniff.py
* README.md
* Output screenshot
* Output1.png
* Output2.png
* Output3.png


12. Final Result

The Basic Network Sniffer successfully captures network packets and displays useful information such as Source IP, Destination IP, Protocol and Payload when available.

TECHNOLOGIES USED

* Python
* Scapy
* Command Prompt
* GitHub

PROJECT OUTCOME

This project helped me understand how network packets are captured and analysed using Python and Scapy. It also improved my understanding of IP addresses, network protocols and packet structure.
